+++
author = "Adam Hawkins"
date = 2020-05-04T15:16:49Z
draft = false
summary = "Patch level improvements to the original 12 factor apps. 4 points to improve the configuration factor in your application."
tags = ["podcast", "architecture"]
title = "12.1 Factor Apps: Config"
series = [ "12 Factor Apps" ]
+++

{{< transistor "https://share.transistor.fm/s/50964f67" >}}

_This is an episode transcript. Visit the [podcast
website](https://share.transistor.fm/s/50964f67) for the full episode,
show notes, and freebies._

Hello friends, it’s me Adam. Welcome back to Small Batches. I
introduced the 12 factor app in the previous episode along with areas
where I think it may be improved. I’m calling these improvements the
"12.1 factor app". So new features and fixes, but no breaking changes;
more like clarifications. I’m going to cover these in coming episodes.
Enough preamble for now.  On with the show.

The 12 factor app states that applications should read config from
environment variables. It implies separation of code and config.
That’s about it, but there’s good bones here. I want something bigger
from this factor. Specifically that applications may be deployed to
new environments without any code changes. This requires a few
additions:

1. Configure the process through command options and environment variables
2. Prefer explicit configuration over implicit configuration
3. Use a dry run option to verify config sanity

These points force applications to be explicit in configuration, which
in turn requires engineers to take more responsibility for
bootstrapping the process. This has proven to be a good thing in my
experience. Consider the first point regarding command line options
and environment variables. Developers interact with command line tools
every single day. There’s a standard interface for passing flags:
command line options. You’ve likely used `curl -X` , `grep -E`,  or
`mysql -u`. These tools may even use values from environment variables
when command lines options are not provided. This is wonderful because
processes may be configured globally with environment variables then
overridden in specific scenarios with command line options.

This simple interface also supports another common use case: looking
up configuration options.  Running a command followed by `--help` or
`-h` typically outputs a usage message listing all command options.
How many times have you struggled to learn which configuration files
or environment variables are required to start a service developed by
other engineers in your company? Now compare that to how many times
you have struggled to find all the options to the grep command? There
is no struggle because `grep --help` tells you everything. On the
other hand, you’re left hoping that your team members put something in
the `README` or on confluence.

Moving on to the second point. I’ll explain this by contrasting
software produced by two ecosystems.

Rails applications use a mix configuration practices. They may use
environment variables but there’s also a a mix of YAML files and
environment specific configuration files (such as `production.rb` or
`staging.rb`). Internal code uses a preset number of environments
(namely `production`, `test`, and `development`) to implicitly change
configuration. Deploying to a new environment requires creating new
configuration files and/or updating YAML files. Starting a rails
application requires running the `rails` command. As a result,
developers are disconnected from the code that bootstraps application
internals then starts a web server.

On the other hand, consider software produced by the go ecosystem.
It’s more common to write a main method that configures everything
through command line options.  In this case there is no need for extra
configuration files or implicit configuration based on environment
names since the concept is irrelevant here. Naturally this requires
developers take more responsibility, but as I said early on, it’s
worth it in the end. Configuring these applications is easier to grok
as well as deploying them to a variety of environments. That’s what
the 12.1 factor app is going for.

The command line interface approach enables DX improvements too. One
of my pet peeves is when a process starts then fails at runtime due to
some missing configuration options. This grinds my gears because
developers devote huge effort to validating user input through web
forms or API calls but tend to neglect configuration validation
entirely! Plus, it’s just frustrating to learn which values are
required through _runtime_ errors. The 12.1 factor app can do better
than this.

The 12.1 factor app will fail and exit non-zero if any required
configuration value is missing. The main method that processes command
line options and environment variables makes this possible. Does the
process require connection to a database and no `--db-url` or `DB_URL`
provided? Then Boom! Error message and exit non-zero. The goal is to
make it impossible to start the process without sane configuration.

Failing with a non-zero exit status integrates nicely with deployment
systems. Recall that a 12 factor "release" is the combination of code
and config. Therefore it’s possible for a config change to result in a
broken release. Given that 12.1 factor apps fail fast, it’s possible
for the deployment system to recognize the failed release then switch
back to the previous release. Contrast this was a "fail later"
approach. The release may be running but failing at runtime. This
looks OK from a deployment perspective since the release started, but
it’s totally broken from the user’s perspective. The 12.1 factor app
easily avoids this scenario.

The "fail fast" approach catches simple user errors such as all values
provided. However that only solves part of the problem. Provided
values are not necessarily correct. Here’s an example. Say the
application requires a connection to Postgres, so the user sets
`POSTGRESQL_URL`. However the application cannot connect to the server
for any reason. It could be networking, mismatched ports, or an
authentication error.  Whatever the reason the result is the same: no
database connection thus a nonfunctional application. This would cause
downtime if deployed to production. I can’t tell how how many times
this has happened to me for legitimate reasons or less so (like
mistyping a hostname or specifying the wrong port).

My point is this type of error may be eliminated by simply trying to
use the provided configuration before starting the process. The idea
here is to use a "dry run" mode to check these sort of things. I’ve
used the dry run mode to check connections to external resources like
data stores or that API keys for external APIs are valid. This aligns
nicely with the "trust but verify" motto. It’s simple. At the end of
the day developers make mistakes. It’s our job to ensure those
mistakes don’t enter production.

Alright. That’s enough for the 12.1 config factor. Here’s a quick
recap:

1. Configure your process through command line options and environment
   variables
2. Fail fast on any configuration error
3. Use a "dry run" mode to verify as much config as possible
4. Prefer explicit configuration over implicit configuration based on
   environment names

Well what do you think of these practices? Have you done anything like
this before, if so how did it turn out? Hit me up on twitter at
smallbatchesfm or email me at hi@smallbatches.fm. Share this episode
around your team too. It’s great reference material for the "new
service checklist" or "best practices" section on Confluence you’re
always trying to write.

Also go to smallbatches.fm/6 for show notes. I’ll put a link to my
appearance on the Rails Testing Podcast where I talk about this topic
in more technical detail. If this episode piqued your interest, then
definitely check that one out. We talk about preflight checks and
smoke tests.

Alright gang. That’s a wrap. See you in the next one. Good luck our
there and happy shipping!
