---
title: "The Toyota Way"
author: "Adam Hawkins"
date: 2021-08-03T22:12:32-10:00
description: |
  The 14 principles from Jeffrey Liker's book "The Toyota Way".
---

Hello everyone welcome back to Small Batches. Today I’m talking about
Jeffery’s Liker’s 2021 book _The Toyota Way_. The book describes the
philosophy and practices that made Toyota.

"The Toyota Way" (as a concept, not the book) may be visualized as a
house with two pillars. One pillar is continuous improvement, or
_kaizen_. Challenge everything. Learn. Explore. Discover. The second
pillar is respect for people. Toyota believes its people can rise to
any challenge and equips them with the philosophy and organizational
support to do so.

![2001 Toyota Way House](/images/toyota-way-2001-house.jpg)

The book breaks this down into 14 principles categorized by the 4Ps:
Philosophy, Process, People, and Problem Solving. I’ve paraphrased
them a bit to better fit this format.

Philosophy, **principle one: Adopt systems thinking**. Take a
long-term view and focus on the entire end-to-end value stream. Do not
prioritize short term results. This is straight out of Deming’s _The
New Economics_ and system of profound knowledge.

Process, **principle two: design systems for flow and identifying
problems**. I’ve paraphrased that one. This is effectively capability
one from _The High Velocity Edge_. The key to this principle is the
second pard. Systems need built in mechanisms to surface problems.
That’s the first step in solving them.

Process, **principle three: use pull based systems**. "Pull" in the
Toyota Way means the ideal state of just-in-time manufacturing: giving
the customers what they want, when they want, and in the amount they
want. This is the basis for all future lean-esque processes. This
part of capability one from The High Velocity Edge on designing
systems as well.

Process, **principle four: level the workflow to create flow**. Toyota
calls this _hiejunka_. The idea is manage incoming work to meet demand
and ensure minimal interruptions. Unleveled work creates waste by
underutilizing resources or overburdening them. Level the work, then
lean begins to take on meaning.

Process, **principle five: standardize work as a foundation for
continuous improvement**. Continuous improvement, or _kaizen_, only
works if there is a base line. Standardizing work means codifying the
best way to do something as it’s currently understood. "Currently" is
the operative word in that sentence.

Process, **principle six: stop and fix problems when they occur**.
This is follow up to principle two. Stop and fix problem as early as
possible in the process. Toyota’s Andon cord is an example. This is
also capability two from _The High Velocity Edge_.

Process, **principle seven: use visual control to support decision
making and problem solving**. The visual sense is the strongest in
human beings. A picture is worth a thousand words. Display the state
of the system and processes in useful visuals so people can quickly
asses the situation and make adjustments if necessary.

Process, **principle eight: smart humans with robot friends**. Toyota
uses technology to support its people and processes. They do not
introduces technology for technology’s sake. They tend to be a bit
behind the adoption curve but that’s OK for them.

People, **principle nine: grow leaders who understand the work, live
the philosophy, and teach it others.** Toyota leaders are coaches at
heart. They deeply understand the ideas of systems thinking,
continuous improvement, and dedicated practice. Their job is teach
others do the same. This is synonymous with capability four from _The
High Velocity Edge_: teach others.

People, **principle ten: develop people and teams who follow the
company philosophy**. Toyota needs people who can follow the
principles and internalize the culture.

People, **principle eleven: help and improve value chain partners**.
Toyota sees itself in a learning relationship with their partners. It
makes sense because if partners improve their value chain, then that
improves the end-to-end value chain back to the customer. That’s
systems thinking right there.

Problem solving, **principle twelve: PDCA everything**.
Plan-check-act-do everything, everywhere, all the time. Think
scientifically about the current condition and how to reach the target
condition. This means continuous improvement, or _kaizen_.
Standardized work provides the back-stop for new experiments.
Regression is not possible. Only improvement guided by empirical
results is. Thank you Deming.

Problem solving, **principle thirteen: align improvement energy of
people through all levels**. Engage people top-down, bottom-up, and
horizontally. Challenge people and give them the autonomy required
rise to the task.

Problem solving, **principle fourteen: learn your way to the future in
small batches**. What a lovely principle, right? Experiment your way
forward through constant iterations. Set bold targets then get there
one batch at a time. This circles all the way back to principle one:
adopt long term systems thinking. That provides the time and mindset
to iterate in small batches over years.

These fourteen principles overlap with the four capabilities (system
design, problem solving, knowledge sharing, teaching others)
introduced in _The High Velocity Edge_. They’re also directly
influenced by Dr. Deming since we worked extensively with Toyota.
Also, the latest edition of this book was updated to factor in Mike
Rother’s work in _The Toyota Kata_. If you’re familiar with these
works or listened to the past podcast episodes then you’ll feel right
at home with these principles. In fact, they may not even come as a
surprise.
