---
title: "Toyota Kata"
subtitle: "Managing People for Improvement, Adapativeness, and Superior Results"
edition: 1st
link: http://www-personal.umich.edu/~mrother/Homepage.html
cover: /images/toyota-kata.jpg
date: 2020-05-31
publishDate: 2020-05-31
author:
  - Mike Rother
tags:
  - management
  - leadership
  - toyota
toc: true
summary: |
  Toyota Kata gets to the essence of how Toyota manages continuous
  improvement and human ingenuity, through daily practice. Mike Rother
  explains why typical companies fail to understand the core of Lean
  and make limited progress and what it takes to make it a real
  part of your culture.
---

You're likely reading this because you're interested in software and
improving some aspect of your job or company. That's wonderful because
your head is already in the right place. Us in tech tend to think
we're special and don't have much to learn from other industries
especially those outdated brick and mortar manufacturing companies.
That couldn't be farther from the truth.

Modern software practices like automated testing, kan-ban, lean, all
arose in other industries. We can thank Toyota for many ideas and
practices. DevOps is culmination of many different ideas. DevOps is
simply expressed in three principles: flow, feedback, and improvement.
Successful tech companies apply all three. I argue that success in
today's market requires these practices. Companies will not be able to
compete with out them. Companies need a different perspective to
succeed in the [age of software][project to product].

Mike Rother's The Toyota Kata describes the invisible hand behind
Toyota's success: continuous improvement. The idea is simple: a
culture of continuous improvement builds more successful businesses.
The Toyota Kata guides the reader through third DevOps principle. It
provides the tools to navigate uncertainty to improve any aspect of
your business from lead times, error rates, revenue, or customer
happiness.

## Toyota's Secret to Excellence

Researchers from around the world have studied the Toyota production
system for almost two decades. During the same period, organizations
have been copying its principles and practices. Yet few companies
managed to achieve the same outcomes. Why is that? Mike Rother-an
engineer, researcher, and continuous improvement expert-says that all
these years we've been copying the wrong things. We know the tools and
techniques that this automotive giant uses daily, but we ignore how
they were developed.

### What is the Toyota Kata?

Thriving companies and martial arts have something important in
common. In martial arts, the term "kata" refers to a routine or
pattern that enhances your practice. According to Rother, this
approach underpins the routine that built Toyota's continuous
improvement culture.

The Toyota Kata demonstrates how two katas-called "improvement kata"
and "coaching kata" denote the invisible managerial routines and the
way of thinking-create the atmosphere of continuous improvement and
adaptation.

Toyota's success has little to do with tools and techniques; it is the
result of the way people think and act. Rother challenges the way we
implement lean manufacturing practices-such as takt time, heijunka,
and pull systems (kanban)-and clarifies a number of key continuous
improvement concepts, such as PDCA and mentor-mentee interaction.

The Toyota Kata is an invaluable introduction to the philosophy of
process improvement. It is a guide on how to practice the improvement
kata to enhance your work strategies and behaviors. It also offers a
blueprint for mastering the "coaching kata" which guides your team to
internalize these new patterns.

### Toyota Kata in 5 Points

- "Kata" means "routines" or "patterns" in Japanese. Toyota has its
  own katas in management thinking and behavior that promote
  continuous improvement. Rother calls this the "improvement kata."
  The other "coaching kata" teaches the improvement kata to employees
  and executives.
- The improvement kata is incompatible with existing management
  thinking and practice. It requires a profound change in how
  companies identify obstacles and develop solutions.
- To initiate the change, a group of senior executives-who have
  mastered the kata-should be given the role of the "keepers of the
  kata."
- The change within the organization must be incremental. Define one
  "target condition" at a time, rather than meeting a vague "vision"
  directly. Don't ignore "small" obstacles; work on any problem at
  occurs. Don't change the whole procedure; change a single aspect at
  a time. Use PDCA "plan-do-check-act" cycles to get through the "gray
  zone" and reach a target condition.
- Everyone in organization needs a mentor. The mentors use the
  coaching kata to develop the mentee's abilities to overcome with
  obstacles.

## Improve Your Process - Toyota Style

Workshops, to-do lists, "value-stream mapping" etc. don't create
process improvement. Toyota's remarkable success is fueled by
invisible routines and management techniques. The idea that companies
can implement a prescriptive solution on top of an existing system is
misleading. The sooner we abandon the "implementing mode" thinking the
better.

### Implementing Mode Vs. Problem-Solving Mode

Companies typically face a large gap between their targets and what
really happens. Even though they defined their desired results-and
often the entire path to achieve that outcome-change just never
happens. Instead of blaming the leaders and managers for poor decision
making, Rother argues that the prevailing management system does not
permit constant improvement and adaptation.

An effective management system adapts an organization to dynamic
conditions. Implementing specific solutions will not make an
organization adaptive nor continuously improving. Following even the
most detailed and accurate list of Toyota's principles and practices
won't help either. That's because an effective management system
arises from invisible routines and habits in thinking and acting.

Toyota's greatest competitive advantage is their ability to understand
ever-changing conditions and develop new solutions. The key is not
some preconceived implementation steps or solutions. It is
understanding the logic and method for how to proceed through the
unclear territory.

Rother argues implementation modes obstruct an organization's progress
and inhibit employee development. An organization needs to adopt a
do-it-yourself problem-solving mode by practicing the Improvement
Kata.

## The Improvement Kata

Typical everyday management tasks are improvement. Production is
improvement. Continuous improvement is an irreplaceable step in the
process.

Continuous improvement is defined as "moving toward a desired state
through unclear territory by being sensitive to and responding to
actual conditions on the ground."

Toyota's "improvement kata" is a new approach to management. In three
points:

- It leverages target condition thinking
- It teaches problem solving and adapting (PDCA - Plan, Do, Check, Act)
- It teaching people a situational awareness so that people respond scientifically in the moment

**Target condition thinking** is the crucial element of the
improvement kata. It teaches practitioners to move quickly and
resourcefully. A target is not a specific goal or outcome; it is a
description of how a process should operate. It is similar to crisis
management-dealing with constraints and overcoming a challenging
condition-and it includes using all available resources and fast cycle
time.

**A target condition is not a vision**. A long-term vision directs
thinking and doing. Full stop. A vision (in Toyota's case: "zero
defects; 100 percent value added; one-piece flow, in sequence, on
demand; security for people) is distant and often considerably vague.
A target condition is an incremental step toward the vision. It
answers the question "what's next?". It is more detailed and specific
than the vision. Since it is specific-and realistic-it may not be
easily changed.

If people take action before defining a target condition, then they
will be inclined to come up with a number of opinions and ideas about
where to go and what to do. At each decision point, they would shift
direction or simply pick the path of least resistance. A target
condition is different. It depersonalizes situations and aligns
everyone's effort.

Defining a target condition is only a part of the improvement kata.
The bulk covers working through emerging obstacles on the path to the
target condition. The most learning occurs there.

### The path toward a target condition is a gray zone.

Making a plan and executing it seems like a great idea. However,
reality is not linear and fully predictable, thus executing a plan may
not be the best strategy to reach target conditions. We cannot control
reality, but we do control our reaction. Much of the improvement kata
covers working through the gray zone. It simply states: take small,
rapid steps, make adjustments and learn along the way.

Toyota's experimentation procedure is the well-known Plan-Do-Check-Act
cycle with one important addition:

1. **Plan.** Define your hypotheses and expectations.
2. **Do (or Try Out).** Try to run the process according to plan, but
   do it on a small scale first. Observe any change closely.
3. **Check (or Study).** Compare the actual result with the expected
   one.
4. **Act (What's next?).** If the process works as expected,
   standardize and stabilize it. If not, start the PDCA cycle again.
5. **Go and See.** Toyota added "Go and See" to the center of the PDCA
   wheel because going and seeing the actual condition is critical in
   all PDCA steps.

### No problem = a Problem

Being interested in what does not go as planned is central to the
improvement kata. If there is no issue, or if there just appears to be
no issue, then the company stagnates. Toyota's management prioritizes
noticing small problems and learning from them.

When we hear about Toyota's accomplishments, we are not aware of
thousands of minor failures that happen every day. These failures sow
the seeds of success. Some companies hide small problems until they
become too complex to manage. Successful organizations, like Toyota,
use these problems to learn and move forward.

### The Five Questions

The Improvement Kata comprises five "minikata" questions:

1. What is the target condition? (The challenge)
2. What is the actual condition now?
3. Which obstacles are currently preventing you from reaching the
   target condition? Which one are you addressing now?
4. What is your next step? (Start of next PDCA cycle)
5. When can we go and see what we learned from taking that step?

These questions define a mental pattern to address any process or situation.

## The Coaching Kata

Let's assume we've mastered the improvement kata. How do we teach
other people? How do we ensure they use the improvement kata correctly
day by day, that they set appropriate target conditions, and carry out
the PDCA cycle effectively? How do we know whether the leaders grasp
have "gone and seen" the actual condition? The answer is the coaching
kata. The coaching kata covers teaching the improvement kata
throughout an organization.

Leaders are teachers. Leaders are not HR or a training department. The
leaders primary task is developing the improvement capability in
people. Managers and supervisors at Toyota instill the improvement
kata into people every day in every area. The manager is the mentor in
this scenario. The mentee masters the improvement kata is learned
through repeated practice with the mentor.

Everyone at Toyota-including high executives-has a mentor.

## How to Get Started with the Improvement Kata

There's still no proven blueprint that cultivates the improvement and
coaching kata. Rother's research does offer a couple of proven tips
however.

### Become an Experimenter

The Toyota Kata's goal is to encourage experimentation, and by doing
so, develop a management system that fits the situation. There's no
other way to change the patterns of thinking and acting in an
organization. There is no approach that works for all companies.
Furthermore, striving to understand the reality of your own situation
is invaluable because it is where you learn. The path is a gray zone
and as you've read in the previous email, there is a kata for working
through it.

### Avoid Known Missteps

Classroom training may provide intellectual knowledge. That by itself
does not change habits or behavior. Similarly, workshops are not
designed to develop new behaviors. Having consultants do it for you is
wrong because it won't teach your organization to learn and grow.
Metrics, incentives, and motivators can't replace the improvement
kata, neither can reorganizing. A culture adaptiveness and continuous
improvement cannot happen just by reorganizing. In fact,
organizational structure is irrelevant. How people act and react
determines success. Toyota internalized this realization by developing
continuous improvement habits in its people.

### How Do We Change?

The only way to learn habits and internalize a certain type of
behavior is to practice repeatedly. The improvement kata is an
amazingly effective way to learn new habitual routines. Last but not
least, you must apply the coaching kata to develop the improvement
kata in your organization.

[project to product]: {{< ref "book/project-to-product" >}}
