---
title: "Two Mode Thinking"
author: "Adam Hawkins"
date: 2021-03-22T21:09:05-10:00
---

Estimating work in a new problem domain is challenging (as if
estimation in software wasn't hard enough already). It's more
challenging due [known unknowns and unknown unknowns][unknowns].

Consider a problem domain you know well. You know what you know and
have a good idea of what what you don't know. If you don't know
something then you're also likely know how to answer your questions.
In other words, turn a known unknown into a known known.

Now consider a problem domain you don't know well. You don't know what
you don't know. That the unknown unknown. They're also likely known
unknowns (the "here be dragons!" type areas). The uncertainty from known
unknowns and unknown unknowns may be paralyzing enough to prevent
exploring and experimentation. That's the key activity for converting
unknown unknowns into known knowns.

This is where engineers need to swap their hats. When working with
knowns then executing is a straight forward process: make the change
that meets the requirements. When working with mostly unknowns then
solely focus on learning: convert unknowns into knowns.

Each mode has different outcomes. The first mode produces functionality
in terms of some concrete deliverable like commits. The second mode
produces information as an input to mode one. Work product from this
phase should be discarded because its experimental by nature.

Real productivity comes from being able to toggle between these two
modes depending on the task at hand. Some tasks you may be able to
just pull up the keyboard and hammer out. Other tasks may require much
more experimentation and learning to even to the point where you can
_consider_ a theoretical solution.

Alternating between these to modes is expected and intended. Everyone
has unknowns. Some are just better at the process for converting them
into knowns.

[unknowns]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/There_are_known_knowns
